
# Hazardous Waste Characteristics  

EPA received many questions about hazardous waste test methods. The questions and responses for this category are listed below.

## What test methods are approved for determining if a liquid is ignitable? Where can someone find the ASTM standards?  

A liquid is identified as an ignitable hazardous waste if it is a solid
waste and a representative sample of the waste has the following
properties: it is a liquid, other than an aqueous solution containing
less than 24 percent alcohol by volume, and has a flash point less than
60° C (140° F), as determined by a [Pensky-Martens Closed Cup
Tester](/hw-sw846/sw-846-test-method-1010b-test-methods-flash-point-pensky-martens-closed-cup-tester),
using the test method specified in ASTM Standard D-93-79 or D-93-80
(incorporated by reference, see Section 260.11), or a [Setaflash Closed
Cup
Tester](/hw-sw846/sw-846-test-method-1020c-standard-test-methods-flash-point-setaflash-small-scale-closed),
using the test method specified in ASTM Standard D-3278-78 (incorporated
by reference, see Section 260.11), or as determined by an equivalent
test method approved by the Administrator under procedures set forth in
Section 260.20 and 260.21. The full citation for ASTM methods is
incorporated by reference in the RCRA regulations.

There is also an explanation of the ignitability characteristic in
Chapter 7 of SW-846, and SW-846 Methods. [SW-846 Test Method
1010A](/hw-sw846/sw-846-test-method-1010b-test-methods-flash-point-pensky-martens-closed-cup-tester)
and [SW-846 Test Method
1020B](/hw-sw846/sw-846-test-method-1020c-standard-test-methods-flash-point-setaflash-small-scale-closed)
also incorporate the ASTM methods by reference. While these methods have
been revised, the regulated community must rely on the older standards
specified in the regulation to determine whether or not a waste exhibits
the characteristics of ignitability.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Should a used oil marketer use SW-846 Method 1311 (TCLP) to determine whether used oil meets the specification levels for arsenic, cadmium, chromium and lead?  

When determining the levels of arsenic, cadmium, chromium, and lead in
used oil that will be burned for energy recovery, the TCLP is not the
appropriate test. The TCLP was developed to simulate leaching in a
landfill, addressing the degree of mobility of waste streams (61 FR
11798, 11809; March 29, 1990). This attribute of the used oil is
irrelevant if the used oil will be burned for energy recovery rather
than land disposed. Instead of a TCLP, a totals analysis should be
performed on the used oil. Chapter Two of "Test Methods for Evaluating
Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods (SW-846)" offers guidance on
selecting appropriate test methods for specific constituents in
different matrices, such as used oil. For example, Table 2-39 of Chapter
Two lists testing options for various metals, including arsenic,
cadmium, chromium, and lead.

Other Category: Inorganic

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What waste analysis procedures must a generator follow if they are treating their hazardous waste to comply with the land disposal restrictions (LDR)?  

The general requirements for generators treating in tanks, containers,
and/or containment buildings to meet land disposal restrictions (LDR)
treatment standards are included in 40 CFR §268.7(a)(5). These
requirements must be documented in a Waste Analysis Plan (WAP), and are
designed to ensure that the generator has sufficient knowledge of their
wastes to manage them properly, including identifying:

-   Parameters to be analyzed
-   Sampling methods
-   Testing and analytical methods
-   Frequency for re-evaluating wastes; or frequency of spot checks.

The generator must obtain a detailed chemical and physical analysis of a
representative sample of any waste that they generate, treat, store, or
dispose. The WAP must contain all information necessary to treat the
waste in accordance with the LDR requirements. It must be kept on-site
and made available to inspectors when requested.

When wastes treated on-site are shipped off-site for disposal, the
generator must comply with the notification and certification
requirements of §267.8(a)(3) (for wastes which meet their treatment
standards prior to shipment offsite). This notice must accompany the
first shipment of waste to the disposal facility and be retained in the
generator's files.

Detailed guidance regarding WAP development is available in the
following documents:

-   Waste Analysis at Facilities that Treat, Store, or Dispose of
    Hazardous Waste: A Guidance Manual -- April 1994 (PDF)[(xx pp, yy K,
    About PDF)] 
-   [Waste Analysis at Facilities that Generate, Treat, Store, and
    Dispose of Hazardous Waste: A Guidance Manual -- Final - April
    2015](/hwgenerators/guidance-manual-waste-analysis-facilities-generate-treat-store-and-dispose-hazardous)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Does a waste derived from a hazardous waste listed solely for exhibiting a characteristic of ignitability, corrosivity, or reactivity remain hazardous when it no longer exhibits a characteristic?  

Does a waste derived from a hazardous waste listed solely for exhibiting
a characteristic of ignitability, corrosivity, and/or reactivity remain
a hazardous waste when it no longer exhibits a hazardous waste
characteristic?

A solid waste derived from a hazardous waste listed solely for
exhibiting a characteristic of ignitability, corrosivity, and/or
reactivity is not a hazardous waste when it no longer exhibits any
characteristic of hazardous waste (40 CFR Section 261.3(g)(2)(ii)).
However, a waste listed solely for exhibiting the characteristic of
ignitability, corrosivity, and/or reactivity that exhibits the
characteristic at the point of generation and subsequently loses the
characteristic is still subject to the land disposal restrictions
requirements in Part 268 (66 FR 27266; May 16, 2001).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Are alcoholic beverages regulated as hazardous waste when they exhibit the characteristic of ignitability?  

Aqueous solutions containing less than 24% alcohol by volume are
excluded from the characteristic of ignitability (§261.21(a)(1)). EPA
originally intended for the alcohol exclusion to exempt alcoholic
beverages and some types of latex paints that exhibit low flash points
due to the alcohol content, but do not sustain combustion because of the
high water content (45 FR 33084, 33108; May 19, 1980). Nevertheless, the
alcohol exclusion is not limited to alcoholic beverages or paints. The
exclusion applies to all aqueous solutions containing less than 24%
alcohol, even if additional non-alcoholic components are present. The
term "alcohol" refers to any alcohol or combination of alcohols (55 FR
22520, 22543; June 1, l990). However, if the alcohol has been used for
solvent properties and is one of the alcohols specified in EPA hazardous
waste codes F001-F005, the waste must be evaluated to determine if it
should be classified as an F-listed spent solvent waste.

Additional guidance on the alcohol exclusion is available in the
following documents:

-   [Memo, Skinner to Walter; February 26, 1985 (RCRA Online #11060)
    (PDF)](https://rcrapublic.epa.gov/files/11060.pdf) [(2 pp, 39.1 K,
    [About PDF](/home/pdf-files))] .
-   [Monthly Call Center Report Question; August 1984 (RCRA Online
    #12274) (PDF)](https://rcrapublic.epa.gov/files/12274.pdf)[(1 pp,
    31.1 K)] .
-   These documents are available at [RCRA
    Online](https://rcrapublic.epa.gov/rcraonline).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Equation for the surface area of the stainless steel coupon in Section 4.5 of SW-846 Method 1110.  

The equation for the surface area of the stainless steel coupon in
Method 1110 is not clear to us. We have received widely differing
answers from different laboratories for the analysis of the same waste
and we believe it is because they calculated the area differently.

The apparent cause of the confusion is due, in part, to the age of
Method 1110, for corrosivity towards steel. It was written at a time
when word processing programs did not have the ability to display
equations as clearly as they do at present. However, going back to first
principles, the equation is used to determine the surface area of the
coupon. The area of a circle is determined from the familiar product of
the radius of the circle, squared, and the constant Pi. Since the radius
(r) is half of the diameter (d) of the circle, the area can expressed in
the three ways shown below.

Area (A) = π (r) ^2^ = π (d/2) ^2^ = π (d 2/4)

The total surface area of the coupon is the sum of the areas of the two
faces of the coupon, plus the area around the outside edge, plus the
area around the edge of the hole in the center of the coupon. Sec. 4.5
of Method 1110 contains an equation that illustrates adding these areas
together to determine the total surface area.

Some laboratories are apparently misreading the equation in Sec. 4.5 of
Method 1110 and placing the two diameters in the first term of the
expression in the denominator of the equation, not the numerator. Using
the mathematical rules for the order of precedence of the operations of
addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, the equation shown
in the method is correct. However, it is shown below in a format that is
less subject to misunderstanding:

Area (A) = \[π (D^2^ - d^2^)\]/2 + (t)(π)(D) + (t)(π)(d)

where:\
t = thickness\
D = diameter of the coupon\
d = diameter of the mounting hole

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Is SW-846 Method 9045D (pH of solids) applicable to organic liquid waste matrices?  

Section 1.1 of Method 9045D states that the pH of non-aqueous liquids
can be determined by the procedure. Water should be added to the
non-aqueous liquid and mixed, because pH cannot be determined without
the presence of water. The non-aqueous liquid should be separated from
the water \[aqueous phase\] and the water analyzed. The pH of the water
is representative of the pH of the waste thereby, the waste is not
directly measured. Liquid organic wastes, such as oily wastes, may
damage the pH electrode if the electrode is exposed directly to the oil.

Note: This does not mean that you must use Method 9045D to evaluate
non-aqueous liquids to see if they exhibit the RCRA characteristic of
corrosivity (40 CFR §261.22).

First, the characteristic of corrosivity is limited to wastes that are
aqueous with pH less than or equal to 2 or greater than or equal to 12.5
using Method 9040C; **OR** any liquid that corrodes steel at a rate
greater than 6.35 mm per year using Method 1110A.

A clarification was written to explain "aqueous" as a waste that is
amenable to pH measurement. It is accepted that this can include
liquids, gels, and sols. The inclusion of Method 1110(A) in the
regulation was discussed in the original background document. The
intention was to regulate liquids that have pH between 2 and 4, but can
corrode steal at a rate that can cause harm to humans and/or the
environment in a relatively short period of time.

When a sample is so corrosive that it exceeds the capacity of the
electrode and/or the meter (for both high and low pH), the analyst may
want to include additional testing to support Method 9040C. Diluting the
waste in water (similar to Method 9045D) and measuring the pH again can
demonstrate that the original pH is much less than 2 or much greater
than 12.5. Additionally, millivolt readings can be used to calculate pH
values in support of Method 9040C.

Method 9045D may be used to evaluate pH properties of non-aqueous
liquids, solids, and sludges, but not for the RCRA characteristic of
corrosivity. Organic liquids may be diluted/extracted in water according
to Method 9045D, and the pH of the aqueous phase can be measured. If the
organic liquid (such as organic acids) contributes hydronium ions to the
solution, the measured pH is reflective of the pH of the organic liquid.
However, if the organic liquid (such as hexane) does not contribute
hydronium ions, the pH being measured is that of the water that was used
for the dilution/extraction. It should be noted that many organic
liquids (even those miscible with water) may interfere with and/or
damage pH electrodes.

Other Category: 9000 Series

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## For SW-846 Method 1311, what are the holding times for the samples before leaching, the leachates before extraction, and the extracts before analysis?  

A table in Sec. 8.5 of Method 1311 indicates:

Sample must undergo TCLP within the following time periods:

SAMPLE MAXIMUM HOLDING TIMES \[DAYS\]

  ---------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
                   From:\         From:\         From:\         Total Elapsed
                   Field\         TCLP\          Preparative\   Time
                   Collection:\   Extraction\    Extraction\                   \              \              \                             To:\           To:\           To:\                          TCLP\          Preparative\   Determ.\                      Extraction     Extraction     Analysis       

  Volatiles        14             NA             14             28

  Semi-volatiles   14             7              40             61

  Mercury          28             NA             28             56

  Metals, except   180            NA             180            360
  Mercury                                                       
  ---------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------

NA: Not Applicable

For the leachate that will be analyzed for organics (including
volatiles, semivolatiles, and the herbicides), you have 14 days from the
collection of the original sample until you have to start the leaching
(extraction). For the metals, you have 180 days from collection until
leaching, except for mercury, where leaching must start within 28 days.

The herbicides are grouped with the "semivolatiles" in Sec. 8.5 of the
method, since both types of analytes are extracted with an organic
solvent. The extractions of the semivolatiles and herbicides from the
leachate must start within 7 days of the completion of the leaching
procedure.

The determinative analyses for the semivolatiles and herbicides must be
completed within 40 days of the completion of the solvent extractions.
The determinative analyses for the volatiles must be completed within 14
days of the completion of the leaching procedure.

The determinative analyses for the metals must be completed within 180
days of the completion of the leaching procedure, except for mercury,
where analyses must be completed within 28 days of the completion of the
leaching procedure.

Other Category: Holding Time & Preservation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What are the preservation requirements for the leachates in SW-846 Method 1311 (TCLP)?  

As noted in Secs. 6.3 and 6.4 of Method 1311 (the Toxicity
Characteristic Leaching Procedure), chemical preservatives shall not be
added to samples before leaching. However, the samples may be
refrigerated, unless refrigeration will result in irreversible physical
changes to the waste.

According to Sec. 6.6, once leached, the portion of the leachate for the
metals analyses must be acidified with nitric acid to a pH \< 2, unless
precipitation occurs, in which case, consult Sec. 7.2.14 of the method
for instructions.

The portions of the leachate to be analyzed for the organics must be
preserved as described in the individual determinative methods. For
volatiles, there is generally no need for further acidification, since
the leachate is already at a pH below 7, which should retard any
biological activity in the leachate. The portions of the leachate for
volatiles, semivolatiles, and herbicides analyses must be stored with
minimal headspace at 4° C.

Other Category: Holding Time & Preservation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Is it allowable to increase the strength of the acid solution in SW-846 Method 1311 and use the acid solution to test additional analytes?  

We believe that the strength of the acid solution in Method 1311 should
be increased in order to leach more of the contaminants from the sample.
We also want to use it to test additional analytes. Are we allowed to do
that?

The Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP), Method 1311, is a
Method Defined Parameter, which means that the results depend entirely
on how the test is conducted.

The test was designed to model a theoretical scenario in which a waste
is mismanaged by placing it in an unlined landfill containing municipal
solid waste. The acetic acid solution in Method 1311 is designed to
simulate the result of rainwater infiltrating the landfill, reacting
with the municipal solid waste, and then leaching through the waste
being tested. The numerical limits for the RCRA toxicity characteristic
(40 CFR §261.24) were derived using the same scenario and were set at
levels that would prevent the groundwater under the landfill from posing
a threat to human health and the environment.

As a result, the specific details of Method 1311 and the numerical
limits for the toxicity characteristic itself are linked together.
Increasing the acid strength of the leaching fluid to leach a larger
amount of the contaminants changes the scenario that the test was
designed to simulate. Therefore, one would have to consider changing the
numerical limits for the constituents listed in the toxicity
characteristic too. Similarly, if one adds constituents to the list of
those to be tested, one would have to develop numerical limits for them
using the same sort of model that EPA used for the toxicity
characteristic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What is the definition of aqueous for the purposes of determining whether a waste is corrosive?  

There is no regulatory definition of aqueous however, for purposes of
the corrosivity characteristic an aqueous waste is defined as the waste
for which pH is measurable. Furthermore, Method 9040C in Test Methods
for the Evaluation of Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods (SW-846) is
the appropriate test method to determine the pH of a waste. This method
is used to measure the pH of aqueous wastes and those wastes where the
aqueous phase constitutes at least 20% of the total volume of the waste.
Therefore, any waste to which this method is applicable must contain at
least 20% free water by volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## How are representative sampling, confidence levels, and statistical analysis used to determine if a waste is hazardous?  

A generator can either test his or her waste or apply knowledge of the
waste to determine whether the waste is hazardous. If a generator
decides to test the waste, testing should be done in accordance with the
test methods set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, Subpart C.

For the purposes of Subpart C, a representative sample can be obtained
using any of the specified methods in Part 261, Appendix I. A
representative sample means a sample of a universe or whole (e.g., waste
pile, lagoon, groundwater) which can be expected to exhibit the average
properties of the universe or whole.

Sampling is the physical collection of a representative portion of the
universe or whole of a waste or waste treatment residual. For a sample
to provide meaningful data, it is imperative that it reflect the average
properties of the universe from which it was obtained, that its physical
and chemical integrity be maintained, and that it be analyzed within a
dedicated quality assurance program. You can choose to use sampling
methods specified in the regulations in 40 CFR Part 261, Appendix I, or
you may choose to petition EPA for equivalency testing and analytical
methods. In particular, SW-846 has been developed by EPA to assist the
regulated community in meeting analytical responsibilities under the
RCRA program. Refer to the following documents for planning and
implementing your strategies for representative sampling, and setting
confidence levels for statistical analysis of data to determine if a
waste is hazardous. See [RCRA Waste Sampling Draft Technical Guidance
Documents](/hw-sw846/draft-technical-guidance-about-waste-sampling-under-resource-conservation-and-recovery-act)
(August 2002).

Also see [ASTM Manual 42 - RCRA Waste Management: Planning,
Implementation, and Assessment of Sampling
Activities](https://www.astm.org/DIGITAL_LIBRARY/MNL/SOURCE_PAGES/MNL42.htm)

Other Category: Sampling

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What testing may be done to prove that a solid meets the characteristic of corrosivity?  

There is no definition of a corrosive solid in the RCRA hazardous waste
regulations.

The following guidance documents provide additional guidance on
corrosive solids:

-   [Memo, Hansen to Licht; March 9, 1992 (RCRA Online #13533)
    (PDF)](https://rcrapublic.epa.gov/files/13533.pdf) [(2 pp, 32.5 K,
    [About PDF](/home/pdf-files))] 
-   [Memo, Straus to Rookstool; August 18, 1987 (RCRA Online #11278)
    (PDF)](https://rcrapublic.epa.gov/files/11278.pdf) [(1 pp, 28.9 K,
    [About PDF](/home/pdf-files))] 
-   Aqueous waste is defined as a waste that is amenable to pH
    measurement for the purposes of 40 CFR §261.22 characteristic of
    corrosivity (D002) ([Memo, Bussard to Parsons; January 7, 1993 (RCRA
    Online #11719))
    (PDF)](https://rcrapublic.epa.gov/files/11719.pdf) [(1 pp, 3.78 K,
    [About PDF](/home/pdf-files))] 

The following guidance documents provide additional guidance on the
definition of aqueous in 40 CFR §261.22:

-   [Memo, Bussard to Franzmathes; April 23, 1993 (RCRA Online #11738)
    (PDF)](https://rcrapublic.epa.gov/files/11738.pdf) [(2 pp, 32.13 K,
    [About PDF](/home/pdf-files))[​] 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What is the time limit for filtering the TCLP leachates after completing the tumbling?  

There is no time limit specified in the TCLP method for the filtration
of the leachate after tumbling. However, the lack of a specification
should not be perceived as permission to delay filtration. The method
assumes that the filtration will be conducted as soon as practical after
the completion of the tumbling (e.g., within 2 hours). If you are
running a number of samples, it may take only a short while to filter
all of the leachates, but you should not delay this filtration any
longer than necessary (e.g., do not wait a day, but start the
filtrations as soon as the tumbling is complete and proceed through all
of the samples). Additionally, for samples that are difficult to filter,
the samples may be centrifuged and then the supernates can be quickly
filtered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What is the effect on the TCLP results if we miss any of the holding times specified in the method?  

What is the effect on the TCLP results if we miss any of the holding
times specified in the method, or if we do not perform the procedure
exactly as written?

The TCLP is a Method Defined Parameter and therefore it must be
performed as written, which includes meeting all specifications for
holding and tumbling times. The effect of failing to perform the method
as written is that the results are not valid for the purposes of
determining whether the waste is hazardous based on the toxicity
characteristic.

However, if the holding times are not met and the results for the
analyses are over the numerical limits in the toxicity characteristic
(40 CFR §261.24), then the data can be used by the generator to
demonstrate that the waste failed the toxicity characteristic and
therefore must be managed as a hazardous waste.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What is the current guidance regarding the reactivity characteristic in regards to cyanide and sulfide?  

What is the current guidance regarding the reactivity characteristic? I
heard that EPA had withdrawn the method for Reactive Cyanide and
Reactive Sulfide as specified in Chapter 7 of SW-846. Is this true?

40 CFR §261.23 includes 8 different properties of a waste that is
hazardous because of the characteristic of reactivity. A waste is a
reactive hazardous waste if it exhibits one or more of those properties.
The regulations do not require specific test methods for any of these
properties. Therefore, generators must use waste knowledge to determine
whether their waste exhibits the characteristic of reactivity.

According to property (5) under 261.23, a waste is hazardous if it is a
cyanide- or sulfide-bearing waste which generates toxic gases or vapors
at a quantity sufficient to present a health danger. In July 1985, EPA
issued interim guidance describing certain threshold levels for cyanide-
and sulfide-bearing wastes and laboratory methods for evaluating such
wastes. In April 1998, EPA withdrew the July 1985 guidance in a [memo
from Bussard and Johnson to Love (RCRA Online #14177
(PDF)](https://rcrapublic.epa.gov/files/14177.pdf) [(10 pp, 561.3 K,
[About PDF](/home/pdf-files))] . Therefore, EPA does not
recommend use of the interim threshold levels or methods to determine if
a waste is hazardous based on the characteristic of reactivity. The
reactivity guidance threshold levels and laboratory methods were removed
from SW-846 Chapter Seven in Update IIIB.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What is a representative sample?  

What is a representative sample? Where can I find guidance on
representative sampling?

Representative sample means a sample of a universe or whole which can be
expected to exhibit the average properties of the universe or whole. To
be representative, a sample must be collected and handled by means that
will preserve its original form and composition, as well as prevent
contamination or changes in concentration of parameters to be analyzed.

Sites where the wastes are of large size or varied composition,
including landfills and drum dumps, present severe difficulties to
investigators attempting to collect representative samples to facilitate
site cleanup.

"[Characterizing Heterogeneous
Wastes](http://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPURL.cgi?Dockey=30002LXF.txt)"
summarizes the planning tools and sampling design strategies now in use,
identifying the advantages and disadvantages of each. The discussion of
the study planning process emphasizes the establishment of reasonable
goals and the participation of the decision maker and the technical
specialists.

"[Samplers and Sampling Procedures for Hazardous Waste
Streams](http://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPURL.cgi?Dockey=30000APW.txt)"
describes a variety of sampling devices designed to meet the needs of
those who regulate and mange hazardous waste.

"[RCRA Waste Sampling and Draft Technical
Guidance](/hw-sw846/draft-technical-guidance-about-waste-sampling-under-resource-conservation-and-recovery-act)",
updates the information provided in Chapter Nine of SW-846. It provides
many improvements and new features.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What are the requirements for performing the method of standard addition when analyzing TCLP extracts by SW-846 Method 6010?  

What are the requirements for performing the method of standard addition
when analyzing TCLP extracts by Method 6010?

The criteria for the method of standard addition (MSA) are outlined in
Sec. 8.4 of Method 1311. In general, when the recovery of the matrix
spike is less than 50%, and the analyte of concern is within 20% of the
regulatory concentration, the sample must be quantified by MSA. This
requirement applies to all TCLP inorganic analytes and the methods used
to determine those analytes, including the current version of ICP Method
6010. Generally, most samples will not have to be analyzed by MSA when
using ICP, which is less susceptible to suppression than other
techniques (e.g. graphite furnace atomic absorption) that were more
commonly used when the TCLP method was published. However, the
laboratory may choose to apply tighter criteria than those described in
the method.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What is meant by "a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the environment" in 40 CFR 261.23 for the reactivity characteristic for cyanide or sulfide waste?  

Is there any guidance that clarifies what is meant by "a quantity
sufficient to present a danger to human health or the environment" from
40 CFR 261.23 discussing the characteristic of reactivity for cyanide or
sulfide waste?

EPA received many comments regarding the proposed rule for the
identification and listing of hazardous waste and the inclusion in the
reactivity definition of "any cyanide or sulfide bearing waste which
can generate toxic gases, vapors or fumes when exposed to mild acidic or
basic conditions."

EPA clarified the language from the proposed rule by including only
those cyanide or sulfide bearing wastes "which generate toxic gases,
vapors and fumes in a quantity sufficient enough to present a danger to
human health or the environment." EPA also specified that "mild acidic
or basic conditions" refers to pH conditions between 2 and 12.5.

Although there are no known test methods for accurately measuring
reactivity, the narrative statement clearly provides guidance on the
description of the reactivity characteristic. In addition, most
generators of reactive wastes are aware that their wastes possess this
property and require special handling. This is because such wastes are
dangerous to the generator's own operations and are rarely generated
from unreactive feed stocks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## How can a solid sample evaluated by TCLP have a concentration in terms of its volume in liters?  

I sent a solid sample to the laboratory for TCLP and they sent back
results in units of milligrams per liter (mg/L). How can a solid sample
have a concentration in terms of its volume in liters?

The TCLP Method 1311 is a leaching procedure that is used to evaluate a
sample to see if it exhibits the RCRA characteristic of toxicity, as
defined in 40 CFR §261.24. As part of the TCLP process, the sample is
leached with a specific acidic solution and the resulting liquid
leachate is subsequently analyzed. Since the leachate is a liquid, the
results from its analysis are reported in units of milligrams per liter,
even though the original sample was a solid.

Because the regulatory limits used in the toxicity characteristic apply
to the leachate, the units are also expressed in units of milligrams per
liter (mg/L). As a result, you do not need to convert the units for
these results and you can simply compare the results to the numerical
limits for the toxicity characteristic shown in 40 CFR §261.24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## How does a generator determine whether a waste contains a liquid for the purposes of testing for the ignitability and corrosivity characteristics?  

The definitive procedure for determining whether a waste contains a
liquid for the purposes of the ignitability and corrosivity
characteristics is Method 1311, the pressure filtration technique.
Method 9095B, the paint filter liquids test, may be utilized to
demonstrate the "positive," that is that a liquid exists for the purpose
of testing for the corrosivity and ignitability characteristics;
however, it is not adequate to demonstrate the "negative," that is that
a waste does not contain a liquid for the purpose of characteristic
testing. This means that, if a generator obtains a free liquid phase
using Method 9095B, then that liquid may be used for the purposes of
determining ignitability and corrosivity. However; wastes that do not
yield a free liquid phase using Method 9095B must be assessed for the
presence of an ignitable or corrosive liquid using the pressure
filtration technique specified in Method 1311 (60 FR 3089, 3092; January
13, 1995).

Methods 1311 and 9095B are available in [SW-846
Online](/hw-sw846/sw-846-compendium).

Additional guidance regarding the use of Methods 1311 and 9095B for
determining the presence of a liquid phase in a waste is available in
the following documents:

-   [Memo, Lowrance to Hiley; April 19, 1993 (RCRA Online #13601)
    (PDF)](https://rcrapublic.epa.gov/files/13601.pdf) [(2 pp, 31.87 K,
    [About PDF](/home/pdf-files))] .
-   [Memo, Lowrance to Wyatt; February 16, 1990 (RCRA Online #13352)
    (PDF)](https://rcrapublic.epa.gov/files/13352.pdf) [(3 pp, 35.6 K,
    [About PDF](/home/pdf-files))] .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## How can I find a copy of the protocol for the TCLP test (Method 1311) in SW-846?  

The Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP), which is used for
determining whether a solid waste is a hazardous waste by exhibiting the
characteristic of toxicity, is Method 1311. [You can download a copy of
Method 1311 from the EPA
website](/hw-sw846/sw-846-test-method-1311-toxicity-characteristic-leaching-procedure).

[SW-846 is also available on-line](/hw-sw846/sw-846-compendium) at no
cost from the EPA Website.

Other Category: General

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Can totals analysis be used in lieu of the TCLP for determining the toxicity characteristic?  

For purposes of RCRA regulations, a solid waste exhibits the
characteristic of toxicity if by using the Toxicity Characteristic
Leaching Procedure (TCLP), Test Method 1311, the extract from a
representative sample of the waste contains any of the contaminants
listed in Table 1 of Section 261.24 at a concentration equal to or
greater than the respective value in the table.

The totals analysis can be useful in determining if the TCLP should be
run to definitively characterize a waste. Section 1.2 of Method 1311
allows for a total analysis in lieu of the TCLP when the constituents of
concern are absent from the waste, or if present, are at such low
concentration that the appropriate regulatory level could not be
exceeded. If a total analysis of the waste demonstrates that individual
analytes are not present in the waste, or that they are present at such
low concentrations that the appropriate regulatory levels could not
possibly be exceeded, the TCLP need not be run.

Wastes that are either 100% solid or that contain both a liquid and a
solid component require conversion of total waste analysis data to
estimates of constituent concentrations in the TCLP extract, or maximum
theoretical leachate concentrations. To evaluate the regulatory status
of a 100% solid, a generator can simply divide each total constituent
concentration by 20 and then compare the resulting maximum theoretical
leachate concentration to the appropriate regulatory limit. If maximum
theoretical leachate concentrations are less than the applicable limits
under Section 261.24, the waste does not exhibit the toxicity
characteristic (TC) and the TCLP need not be run. If the total waste
analysis data yield a maximum theoretical leachate concentration that
equals or exceeds the TC threshold, the data cannot be used to
conclusively demonstrate that the waste does not exceed the TC. If the
latter is true, the generator may have to conduct further testing to
make a definitive TC determination.

For waste that has both solid and liquid components, an analyst can
perform a compositional analysis of the waste instead of a full TCLP
evaluation. A representative sample of the waste must be subjected to a
preliminary percent solids determination as described in the TCLP. The
liquid and solid portions of the sample are then analyzed for total
constituent concentration. The following equation may be used to
calculate the maximum theoretical leachable concentration:

\[A x B\] + \[C x D\]\
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ = E\
B + \[20 (L/kg) x D\]

Where:\
A = Concentration of the analyte in liquid portion of the sample (mg/L)\
B = Volume of the liquid portion of the sample (L).\
C = Concentration of the analyte in solid portion of the sample (mg/kg)\
D = Weight of the solid portion of the sample (kg)\
E = Maximum theoretical concentration in leachate (mg/L)

If the maximum leachable concentration is below the regulatory
concentration, the TCLP does not need to be performed.

A representative sample means a sample of a universe or whole (e.g.,
waste pile, lagoon, groundwater) which can be expected to exhibit the
average properties of the universe or whole. Sampling is the physical
collection of a representative portion of a universe or whole of a waste
or waste treatment residual. To be representative, a sample must be
collected and handled by means that will preserve its original physical
form and composition, as well as prevent contamination or changes in
concentration of the parameters to be analyzed. For a sample to provide
meaningful data, it is imperative that it reflect the average properties
of the universe or whole from which it was obtained, that its physical
and chemical integrity be maintained, and that it be analyzed within a
dedicated quality assurance program.

To illustrate, suppose a restaurant is demolished and several stainless
steel containers are the only metal included among other debris
consisting of concrete, brick, plaster and glass. A representative
sample would include stainless steel, concrete, brick, wood, plaster,
and glass in the same proportions as they are found in the restaurant
debris.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Are we required to prepare a duplicate TCLP sample that is tumbled at the same time as the original sample?  

Method 1311 does not address the need for a duplicate sample. The need
for a duplicate sample could be specified in a quality assurance project
plan (QAPP) or sampling and analysis plan (SAP) for any given project,
but it is not a required part of the method.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What is the proper way to handle petroleum products (i.e., oils) for SW-846 Method 1311 (TCLP)?  

What is the proper way to handle Petroleum Products (i.e., oils) for
Method 1311 (TCLP)? We prefer to handle these as totals because we do
not want to contaminate our ZHEs and pressure filtration apparatus with
oil. However, we get some resistance from clients that feel we are not
handling their samples by the regulatory procedure.

Waste oils need to be characterized if they will be disposed of instead
of being recycled.

It is absolutely acceptable to analyze the total fraction in oil samples
to determine if they are hazardous. However, the results must be
properly interpreted. For oil that passes through a filter as described
in the method, the total concentrations must be compared DIRECTLY to the
TCLP limits. For oil that does NOT pass through the filter, it is
considered a solid and the total concentrations can be divided by 20 in
order to compare to the TCLP limits.

Here is a more detailed description of the steps to follow:\
First, determine if the waste passes through a filter according to
Section 7.1.1 of EPA Method 1311. If the waste passes through the
filter, treat the filtrate as the TCLP sample, perform all appropriate
determinative methods directly on this sample (diluted as necessary for
analysis), and compare the results (corrected for any dilution) directly
to the TCLP limits given in Table 7‐1 of Chapter 7.

According to Section 7.1.2, if the percent solids are greater than 0.5%
of the sample, the unfilterable portion is treated as a solid. Caution
should be taken when attempting to dry waste samples that may be
flammable. The unfilterable material can either be processed through
TCLP as a solid or a total analysis can be performed on the material
(i.e., divide the total result by 20 for comparison to TCLP limits). For
details on how to convert total results to a number for comparison to
TCLP limits, see the FAQ above on the use of totals analysis in lieu of
the TCLP for  determining the toxicity characteristic.

If the totals results corrected as described in the link above are below
the TCLP limits, the waste can be considered nonhazardous. If the
corrected total results exceed the TCLP limits, the sample can be
considered hazardous. In order to demonstrate that such a sample (where
total results exceed TCLP limits) is NOT hazardous, it would need to be
carried through the TCLP procedure as a solid to determine if the
leachate yields results less than the TCLP limits.

Following is a web link to an older reference document titled,
[Technical Assistance Document for Complying with the TC Rule and
Implementing the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure
(TCLP)](http://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPURL.cgi?Dockey=P1007NTD.txt) that is
quite comprehensive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Are there SW‐846 methods and regulatory levels for determining if cyanide and sulfide are reactive?  

Are there specific SW‐846 methods for Reactive Cyanide and Reactive
Sulfide? Also, is there a reactivity characteristic regulatory level for
cyanide and sulfide?

There are multiple SW-846 methods for determining various cyanide and
sulfide species. However, there are no specific methods currently
available for reactive cyanide and reactive sulfide for reactivity
characteristic determination. Such guidance and methods used to exist,
including regulatory thresholds, but the methods were removed from
SW-846 in 1998 due to a variety of issues (e.g., the tests worked well
with pure compounds, but failed with waste mixtures such that results
were very unreliable). Please see Chapter 7 of SW-846 for further
discussion of the issue.

You can also visit 40 CFR §261.23, which includes the 8 properties of
waste that is hazardous due to the characteristic of reactivity. A waste
is reactive hazardous waste if it exhibits one or more of these
properties. The regulations do not require specific test methods for any
of these properties, so generators must use their knowledge of the waste
to make a determination. According to property (5) under 261.23, a waste
is hazardous if it is a cyanide- or sulfide-bearing waste which
generates toxic gases or vapors at a quantity sufficient to present a
health danger.

In July 1985, EPA issued interim guidance describing certain threshold
levels for cyanide- and sulfide-bearing wastes and laboratory methods
for evaluating such wastes. In April 1998, EPA withdrew the July 1985
guidance. Therefore, EPA does not recommend use of the interim threshold
levels of methods to determine if a waste is hazardous based on the
characteristic of reactivity. EPA has removed the guidance threshold
levels and the laboratory methods from Chapter Seven of SW-846. A copy
of the EPA memorandum which withdrew the reactivity characteristic
guidance can be found in the memorandum [Withdrawal of Cyanide and
Sulfide Reactivity Guidance
(PDF)](https://rcrapublic.epa.gov/files/14177.pdf)[(10 pp, 561.3 K,
[About PDF](/home/pdf-files))] .

The agency relies entirely on a descriptive definition of reactivity for
cyanide and sulfide wastes, and depends on the generator's knowledge of
their waste stream to classify it as a D003 waste, without the benefit
of a characteristic test.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Skipping sections 7.1.4 -- 7.1.4.4 in SW-846 Method 1311 based on previous extraction fluid determinations.  

Can sections 7.1.4 -- 7.1.4.4 (determining the type of extraction fluid)
in Method 1311 be skipped if you have significant data showing the
extraction fluid always used has been number 1 or 2 for a certain waste
stream? We have a waste stream that always requires extraction fluid
number 2 and were wondering if sections 7.1.4 -- 7.1.4.4 could be
skipped based on the previous extraction fluid determinations?

Method 1311 is a Method Defined Parameter (MDP) and must be followed
exactly as described. However, there are situations where it may be
inappropriate or wasteful to perform parts of the procedure. What you
describe might be one of those situations. The best thing to do is to
contact the RCRA regulator for the applicable site and get their
permission to not check which fluid to use based on the historical
precedent for your waste stream.

Two factors might have to be considered. Is the waste stream liable to
change such that the other fluid might have to be chosen occasionally?
Secondly, when performing 7.1.4-7.1.4.4 on the waste in question, is the
measured pH in the vicinity of the pH 5.0 decision point? If it is not
close to the decision point and the waste stream is stable, the wrong
extraction fluid could not be chosen and the regulator may agree to let
you skip steps 7.1.4-7.1.4.4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What is the procedure when matrix interference effects cause elevated TCLP Lower Limit of Quantitation (LLOQ) that are above the TCLP regulatory limits?  

What is the procedure when matrix interference effects cause elevated
TCLP Lower Limit of Quantitation (LLOQ) that are above the TCLP
regulatory limits?

For example, if you analyze a soil sample for TCLP SVOCs and you have a
LLOQ for 2,4‐Dinitrotoluene (D030) of "\<2.0 mg/L," how is this handled
if the TCLP regulatory limit for 2,4‐Dinitrotulene is 0.13 mg/L? Based
on generator knowledge, you know that there should be no
2,4‐Dinitrotoluene at the site ‐ however you can't disprove a negative
since the LLOQ is higher than the TCLP regulatory limit for this
constituent.

According to Table 7‐1 footnote (2) in Chapter Seven of SW‐846,
[Characteristics---Introduction and Regulatory
Definitions](/hw-sw846/chapter-seven-sw-846-compendium-introductory-and-regulatory-definitions-pertaining),
several contaminants, including 2,4‐dinitrotoluene, have quantitation
limits greater than the calculated regulatory level. In such cases, the
quantitation limit becomes the regulatory level.

However, for this to be valid, the laboratory should take every step
possible to keep the reporting limit as low as possible (e.g., avoid
unnecessarily high sample dilutions, use a clean‐up method, etc.).

For analytes not covered by the footnote, it is expected that the
laboratory will use analytical procedures that achieve quantitation
limits at or below the regulatory level.

Other Category: QA/QC

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Extraction fluids for SW-846 Method 1312 (SPLP) analyses of samples that may contain cyanide.  

According to Method 1312, Section 5.4.3, extraction fluid #3 is used to
determine cyanide. Also, Section 7.1.4.3 states for cyanide containing
wastes and/or soils, extraction fluid #3 must be used because leaching
of cyanide containing samples under acidic conditions may result in the
formation of hydrogen cyanide gas. How is this to be interpreted when
analyzing both cyanide and metals on an SPLP extraction? Is fluid #3 to
be used for all SPLP analyses which may contain cyanide, or is one
extraction done with fluid #3 for cyanide and another extraction with
the appropriate fluid for metals?

Section 5.4 of Method 1312 indicates that Extraction fluid #3 is to be
used for cyanide and volatiles. Extraction fluid #1 and #2 are supposed
to be used for other analytes: Extraction fluid #1 for sites east of the
Mississippi River and #2 for sites west of the Mississippi River.
Therefore, if metals and cyanide analyses are needed, two separate
sample aliquots would be extracted with two different fluids.

Other Category: Inorganic

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Clarification on the selection of the extraction fluid for SW-846 Method 1312, SPLP.  

We are looking for clarification on the selection of the extraction
fluid for EPA Method 1312, SPLP. Written in the method is as follows:

Section 5.4.1 (Extraction fluid #1) The fluid is used to determine the
leachability of soil from a site that is east of the Mississippi River,
and the leachability of wastes and wastewaters.

Section 5.4.2 (Extraction fluid #2) The fluid is used to determine the
leachability of soil from a site that is west of the Mississippi River.
(Similar statements are made in section 7.1.4.)

1\) Does the source (generation) location or disposal location determine
whether or not the soil is east or west of the Mississippi River?

2\) It appears that whether or not the sample is a waste (or wastewater)
takes precedence over whether or not the waste (or wastewater) comes
from east or west of the Mississippi River. Is this correct? (As an
example, if the sample is a waste and comes from west of the Mississippi
River, use fluid #1?) This seems to be confirmed in Section 2.2 "If the
sample is a waste or wastewater, the extraction fluid employed is a pH
4.2 solution."

3\) What would the specific definition of a "waste" or "wastewater" be
as used in the 1312 method (where this would take precedence over sample
site for the selection of the extraction fluid)?

The purpose of SPLP is to determine the mobility of both organic and
inorganic analytes from liquids, soils, and wastes, caused from the
actions of precipitation. There is a very simplified assumption that
precipitation east of the Mississippi is more acidic due to industrial
activity and less buffering capacity of the soils there, versus west of
the Mississippi. Therefore, the concern is leaching and mobilization of
contaminants above the regulatory limits at the location of disposal
where the contaminants would be released into the environment.
Generally, the soil origin and potential disposal site would be exactly
the same place or on the same side of the river, although there may be
cases where this is not so (i.e., in states bordering the river).

On the second item, the fluid selection only applies if the sample is a
soil. If it is a waste or solids from wastewater, the pH 4.2 fluid is
used by default. No fluid is used if the sample has less than 0.5%
solids, in which case the filtered liquid is considered the extract.
(See section 2.1)

On the third item, there are many definitions as to what is a waste or
wastewater. Rather than define those for the method, it is much simpler
to just determine if the sample is a soil or not. If it is a soil, make
the fluid selection. If it is not a soil, consider it a waste or
wastewater and use the pH 4.2 fluid, except if the sample is \<0.5%
solids when no fluid is used.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## For SW-846 Methods 1311 and 1312, is it an acceptable alternative to use internal standards for all leachates?  

Both Method 1311 and Method 1312 have language specifying the use of an
internal calibration quantitation method for each metallic component if
the spike recovery for the element is \< 50% and the concentration of
the contaminant falls in the range from 80 to 100% of the regulatory
level. Both of these methods then specify that "the method of standard
additions shall be employed as the internal calibration quantitation
method for each metallic component."

For Methods 1311 and 1312, is it an acceptable alternative to use
internal standards for all leachates to meet the requirement of an
internal calibration quantitation method rather than using methods of
standard additions?

The purpose of the language in Section 8.4 of the methods is to remove
the effects of matrix suppression that might cause a sample extract
within 20% of the regulatory limit to appear to be below the regulatory
limit. When 1311 and 1312 were written, atomic absorption techniques
were most commonly used and could be strongly affected by matrix
effects. Since you are free to choose the analytical method for TCLP and
SPLP extracts, choosing an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) method,
which is far less prone to matrix effects, will make the situation
described in Section 8.4 of Methods 1311 and 1312 much less likely.

Use of dilution or internal standards, or both, increases the likelihood
of a passing matrix spike recovery above 50%, removing the need for the
method of standard additions (MSA). If dilution and internal standards
do not work and spike recoveries are still below 50%, then MSA may be
the only option left. This would be very unlikely if ICP analysis is
used.

Internal standards are not mentioned anywhere in either Method 1311 or
1312. As mentioned in Section 8.4.1 of both methods, "The method of
standard additions shall be employed as the internal calibration
quantitation method for each metallic contaminant." Use of an
analytical method that utilizes internal standards (whether ICP-MS or
ICP‐AES) does not eliminate the need for MSA when spike recoveries are
below 50%. Section 8.2.3 allows you to use "other internal calibration
methods, modification of the analytical methods, or use of alternate
analytical methods to accurately measure the analyte concentration in
the \[TCLP or 1312\] extract when the recovery of the matrix spike is
below the expected analytical method performance." "Accurately
measure" in that statement means acceptable spike recovery.

Other Category: QA/QC

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Defining the TCLP extract for a volatile organic compound sample for SW-846 Method 1311.  

Within EPA Method 1311, Section 2, Summary of Method, specifically
Section 2.1 "for liquid wastes \< 0.5% solids, the waste, after
filtration through 0.6‐0.8 μm filter", is defined as the TCLP Extract.
Would that be true for a VOC sample?

The method indicates that the percent solids be determined as described
in Section 7.1 using the non‐ZHE filtration unit, and if the solids are
less than 0.5%, section 7.1.2 directs the user to section 7.3 for
volatile compounds.

Section 7.3.4 indicates that if the waste contains \<0.5% solids, the
liquid portion of the waste, after filtration, is defined as the TCLP
extract. Although the method does not explicitly state this, it is
presumed that liquid samples for volatiles would be filtered using the
ZHE, and the filtrate would be collected for analysis.

However, it would be a more conservative, and therefore acceptable
approach to analyze the liquid sample with less \< 0.5% solids for VOCs
without filtration. In this scenario, there is a possibility of getting
a larger value without filtration that may cause a sample to be
classified as hazardous when it is not technically hazardous (i.e., if
it was carried through Method 1311 as written). This potential high bias
is acceptable from a regulatory standpoint because the waste would be
treated more carefully than if it was considered non‐hazardous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Is it permissible to use a reduced sample volume to perform the leachate extraction for SW-846 Method 1311 (TCLP)?  

Is it permissible to use a reduced sample volume (e.g., 50g/1L
extraction fluid vs. 100g/2L) to perform the leachate extraction as long
as the 20:1 extraction fluid to dry weight ratio is maintained?

Since Method 1311 is a Method Defined Parameter (MDP) method, it is
exempt from the flexibility clause that is in effect for most of the
other SW-846 methods. As such, it must be followed prescriptively,
especially in a regulatory situation.

There are multiple places within the method that call for a minimum of
100-gram samples. When the method indicates a 100-gram minimum is
recommended, it means that a larger sample size may be needed with some
types of wastes, especially if it is very heterogeneous. Concrete is a
good example of heterogeneous waste. If more than the minimum of
100-grams is used, you must retain the 1:20 ratio of solids to fluid.
The method warns samplers to make sure enough sample is provided for the
correct weight of sample required, plus extra for the duplicates and the
preliminary tests for particle sizing and fluid selection.

If you are doing organic volatiles you must use the zero-headspace
extractor (ZHE) and the minimum sample size is reduced to 25 g due to
the 0.5-L volume limitation of the ZHE device. For all other extractions
not done in a ZHE, the minimum is 100 g. If you use less than 100 g,
even if you use the correct solid:fluid ratio, the results will not be
valid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What is the correct procedure to meet the ambient temperature requirement for SW-846 Method 1311 (TCLP)?  

Method 1311 Section 7.2.11 says: Ambient temperature (i.e., temperature
of room in which extraction takes place) shall be maintained at 23 ± 2°
C during the extraction period.

Does this mean we have to continuously monitor and record the
temperature throughout the 18 hours, or is recording at the beginning
and end sufficient? What is the correct procedure to meet the
temperature requirement?

Extraction temperature is one of the more critical parameters in TCLP,
so some form of control is necessary. As you pointed out, the method
only states the temperature shall be maintained at 23 plus or minus 2°
C. It does not specify how to monitor the temperature, or that
continuous monitoring of the temperature is needed. It then becomes a
matter of how well the extraction temperature is documented within
allowable limits to the satisfaction of the auditor or regulator. A
given auditor or regulator may be satisfied with the laboratory just
recording a starting temperature. Another may want to see a starting and
ending temperature. Another may want to see a starting, middle, and end
temperature. For example, it may happen that extractions run overnight
and room heating or cooling is reduced during off hours to save energy.
In that case you may drop below or go above the approved temperature
range during the night. In such cases, it may be necessary to record
temperatures during the night to document that stayed within range. In
such cases, an auditor may be satisfied that the temperature at the
beginning and end was recorded, and that it is documented the room is on
a thermostat control with set points to heat if temperature goes below
70 and cool if above 77 degrees F. Still another auditor may want to see
continuous temperature monitoring. That is the most conservative
approach and should satisfy all auditors or regulators, including NELAC
auditors for laboratory certification.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Does a lab have to check the pH of the extraction fluid daily for SW-846 Method 1311 (TCLP)?  

Method 1311, Section 5.7.2 (note), states, "The pH should be checked
prior to use to ensure that these fluids are made up accurately". With
using "should be", not "must" or "shall", does a lab have to check
the pH of the extraction fluid daily?

In this situation, checking the pH after the fluid is prepared, but
before it is used, is mandatory. The pH is a critical parameter and must
be controlled and monitored.

The note in 5.7.2 does not state that the pH of the extraction fluid
should be checked daily. However, it would be a good practice to check
the pH on the day of use, especially since it is very simple and quick
to do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Particle size reduction during the determination of the appropriate extraction fluid in Section 7.1.4.1 of SW-846 Method 1311 (TCLP).  

I was hoping you could please provide some guidance on Section 7.1.4.1
of the EPA 1311 TCLP method. Specifically, the requirement for particle
size reduction (\< 1 mm) used during the determination of the
appropriate extraction fluid. We are unclear as to the best way to
approach the \< 1 mm particle size reduction for samples such as rags,
cloth, etc. Is the intent that particle size reduction is necessary for
these types of samples, and if so, do you have any recommendations on
how this can be done? For the \< 9.5 mm particle size reduction for the
extraction, there is information about not requiring particle size
reduction where the surface area per gram of material is equal to or
greater than 3.1 cm2 (section 7.1.3). Even though the surface area
comment is not included for the \< 1 mm particle size reduction (section
7.1.4.1), is the intent the same (i.e., particle size reduction to \< 1
mm is not required where the surface area per gram of material is equal
to or greater than 3.1 cm2, such as for cloth, paper, etc.)?

Because of the difficulty in reducing the particle size to less than 9.5
mm for samples like cloth, paper and rags, the surface area criteria is
used instead of particle size criteria for the extraction procedure. It
would be even harder to reduce the particle size for those types of
samples to less than the 1 mm called for in the extraction fluid
determination procedure. Therefore, the surface area criteria would also
apply for the procedure to determine which extraction fluid to use. As
you mentioned, the intent is the same.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## If sufficient solid volume remains from the solids determination in SW-846 Method 1311, Section 7.1.1.7, can it be used for extraction starting at Section 7.2.10?  

Please clarify that if sufficient solid volume remains from the % solids
determination in Method 1311, Section 7.1.1.7, to support analysis, it
can be used for extraction starting at Section 7.2.10, even if below the
recommended 100-gram sample size.

The 100-gram minimum applies to the unfiltered sample, not the solid
remaining after filtration (unless its 100% solid). Section 7.2.1 states
that if the sample is 100% solid, a minimum of 100 grams should be
carried through the procedure starting at Section 7.2.9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Range of pH allowed during preparation of leachate fluids for SW-846 Method 1311 (TCLP).  

The sections of Method 1311 (TCLP) that deals with the preparation of
Leachate fluids 1 and 2 states that if the fluids do not fall between a
certain pH range, they must be remade.

Why can't a few drops of the individual reagent (i.e. sodium hydroxide
solution or acetic acid solution) be used to adjust the pH of the
extraction fluid, instead of having to discard the bulk solution and
start again?

Since Method 1311 is a Method Defined Parameter (MDP) method, it is
exempt from the flexibility clause that is in effect for most of the
other SW‐846 methods. As such, it must be followed prescriptively,
especially in a regulatory situation. Getting the exact pH with buffered
solutions that are used in TCLP depends on using the right amount and
concentration of the reagents. The range of pH allowed is fairly easy to
accommodate using regular laboratory glassware and equipment to measure
volumes and prepare reagents. Some laboratories measure everything out
by weight (accounting for the density) to get more accuracy, which is
also allowed.

Technically, the nature of the fluid is changed by pH adjustments. As
more acid or base is added to get the pH within range, the buffering
capacity of the fluid is changed. Glacial acetic acid is pure, so
diluting it with the right amount of water to prepare fluid #2 is
straightforward. Fluid #1 requires the use of 1N NaOH, which can be
prepared improperly. If prepared from NaOH pellets, which are
hygroscopic, significant amounts of water can be absorbed if the pellets
are old or exposed to the atmosphere for any length of time.
Consequently, you may not have 1N NaOH, and using the prescribed volumes
in the method will give you a pH that is too low. If the NaOH
concentration is verified after making it from scratch or 1N NaOH is
purchased, the prescribed amount of NaOH and glacial acetic acid per
liter will give the right pH, within the allowed window. We have also
seen situations where the fluids were prepared correctly, but the pH
probe was calibrated improperly. Adjusting the pH to the supposed
"proper" pH in that case, would have led to improper fluid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Acceptable extraction container construction for SW-846 Methods 1311 (TCLP) and 1312 (SPLP).  

Both Methods 1311 (TCLP) and 1312 (SPLP) contain the following passage
for acceptable extraction container construction.

"It is recommended that borosilicate glass bottles be used instead of
other types of glass, especially when inorganics are of concern."

If another container type was used, but the blanks are acceptable, what
would the concerns be?

The recommendation for borosilicate glass in Methods 1311 and 1312 is
based on potential leaching of inorganic species from other types of
glass. Borosilicate glass causes fewer problems. Keep in mind that this
is only a recommendation and use of borosilicate glass is not mandatory.
If other types of glass bottles are providing acceptable blanks for the
parameters being monitored, then they are acceptable to use. However,
extra diligence is needed regarding blanks when using non-borosilicate
glass bottles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What are the requirements for documenting the tumbling rate for TCLP extractions?  

What are the recommendations or requirements for documenting the
tumbling rate for TCLP extractions (e.g., on a daily basis, annual
basis, etc.)? We know the equipment is typically within range since they
are simple motors and if there are problems they seem to be very
apparent (not rotate at all).

The rotation speed of the tumbling apparatus must be within
specifications of 28-32 rotations per minute. At a minimum, this should
be checked at the start of the extraction and recorded with every batch
as you would record the temperature and rotation time. Depending on the
apparatus type, you may want to record the rpm at the end of rotation as
well to assure the apparatus was stable. This check can be done in 30
seconds looking for 14-16 rotations.

Many tumblers have safety features built in like a friction clutch that
allows slippage, should an arm, leg, or loose clothing get caught during
rotation. Those clutches can become loose over time and rotations may be
slower or stop, even though the motor is turning normally. Rotations
should be checked under full load as the extra weight may cause
slippage, whereas an empty tumbler may rotate acceptably. Friction
clutches can also loosen when the motor is shut off and the rotator is
moved by hand to a position that allows loading the vessels. Motors can
also wear out and bearings or gear boxes can become dry, causing slower
rotation speeds. If the tumbler was purchased, check with the
manufacturer's documentation for proper operation and maintenance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What is an appropriate SW-846 method to use for reactive sulfide?  

What is an appropriate method to use for reactive sulfide? The method
that was described in Chapter 7 of SW-846 (7.3.4.2) no longer exists.

Reactive sulfide, formerly described in SW‐846 Section 7.3.4.2, referred
to those sulfide species that could form hydrogen sulfide gas under
mildly acidic conditions. In July 1985, EPA issued interim guidance
describing certain threshold levels for cyanide‐ and sulfide‐bearing
wastes and laboratory methods for evaluating such wastes. In April 1998,
EPA withdrew the July 1985 guidance. Therefore, EPA does not recommend
use of the interim threshold levels or methods to determine if a waste
is hazardous based on the characteristic of reactivity. Sections 7.3.3
and 7.3.4 were amended by the Methods Innovation Rule (SW‐846 Final
Update IIIB) published in the Federal Register, June 14, 2005 (Volume
70, Number 113), to withdraw specific reference to methodologies and
threshold concentration levels.

However, the reactivity characteristic for waste must still be
evaluated; 40 CFR §261.23 includes 8 different properties of a waste
that would trigger the designation as "hazardous" based on the
characteristic of reactivity. A waste is a reactive hazardous waste if
it exhibits one or more of those properties. The regulations do not
require specific test methods for any of these properties. Therefore,
generators must use waste knowledge to determine if their waste exhibits
the characteristic of reactivity. According to property (5) under
§261.23, a waste is hazardous if it is a cyanide‐ or sulfide‐bearing
waste which generates toxic gases or vapors at a quantity sufficient to
present a health danger. It is the responsibility of the generator and
their analytical laboratory to evaluate the waste for the reactivity
characteristic, as EPA no longer specifies a procedure for this
evaluation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## How are the cyanide and sulfide reactivity characteristics determined?  

These parameters are no longer determined analytically. With the
promulgation of the Methods Innovation Rule on June 19, 2005, SW-846 was
amended to withdraw references to required methods for testing of
reactive sulfide and cyanide, and also withdrew the threshold levels for
conditional delisting of RCRA Facilities. Please also see the 1998
memorandum regarding this issue, "[Withdrawal of Cyanide and Sulfide
Reactivity Guidance
"(PDF)](https://rcrapublic.epa.gov/files/14177.pdf)[(10 pp, 561.3 K,
[About PDF](/home/pdf-files)).] 

Waste generators continue to have the obligation to determine whether
their waste is RCRA hazardous under 261.23(a)(5) and 262.11, as well as
other parts of the regulations. One must use the regulatory narrative
for the determination of reactive cyanide and sulfide. The 1998 memo
provides some guidance to waste generators, and there is a more specific
Land Disposal Restriction (LDR) treatment standard for wastes that are
hazardous under this provision (see 40 CFR §268.40).

There are a number of sources for more general guidance on making a
"knowledge-based" hazardous waste determination under 40 CFR §262.11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Can you provide more definitive guidance regarding the interpretation of "as soon as possible" in SW-846 Methods 9040 and 9045?  

Methods 9040 and 9045 for pH both say that samples should be analyzed as
soon as possible. 40 CFR 136 Table II defines the maximum holding time
for Hydrogen ion (pH) as 15 minutes.

Can you provide more definitive guidance regarding the interpretation of
"as soon as possible"?

Methods 9045D and 9040C can be done in the field, but often field
conditions cannot be controlled and may be unfavorable for accurate
analyses. The methods are generally meant to be used in a laboratory
setting under controlled conditions.

Because of potential changes from microbial activity, or shifts in
chemical equilibrium, sample pH should be taken as soon as possible upon
receipt at the laboratory. It is expected pH of collected samples would
be analyzed within a few hours of laboratory receipt, and not the next
day. The method is written to be followed sequentially with no undue
delay between steps, except for the one hour settling time for soils in
Section 7.2.2 or 15 minutes settling time for wastes in Section 7.3.2 of
9045D. Also, keep in mind that Methods 9045D and 9040C are Method
Defined Parameter (MDP) methods that must be followed exactly as written
with no modifications.

The holding time of "Analyze as soon as possible" is not clearly
defined for SW-846, but is only recommended as a qualitative goal. In
2007, the definition for "immediately" was established as 15 minutes for
the NPDES Program (40 CFR 136, Table II), however, that does not apply
to the RCRA program and SW-846. Even though SW-846 Method 9040C (and
Method 9045D) are MDP methods and must be followed prescriptively,
Section 6.0 of Method 9040C on holding time is not prescriptive. The
method authors recognized changes in pH begin as soon as a sample is put
into a container and specified that samples should be analyzed as soon
as possible. If they meant to analyze by an exact time, the method
authors would have put that time into the method. Instead, they left it
up to the user to do what is feasible as soon as possible. SW-846 also
makes a distinction between "must" or "shall" language that is
mandatory, as opposed to guidance language like "should" or "may".
Note that Section 6.0 of Method 9040C uses the word "should".

The actual holding time for pH analysis should be specified in the
quality assurance plan under which the sample was collected and
agreed‐upon by all stakeholders involved, including those who have to
measure the pH (be it in the laboratory or in the field). In the
laboratory, we recommend performing the analysis within a few hours of
receipt, and not the next day.

Other Categories: 9000 Series, Holding Time & Preservation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## If a client asks for Ignitability on a solid matrix sample, is it normally considered acceptable to analyze by the 1020B method, or should 1030 be used?  

For determination of the ignitability characteristic in solid wastes,
SW‐846 Method 1030 should be followed. Method 1020 is only applicable to
liquid wastes.

Last updated on September 26, 2024

